TXLC(1)                                                                TXLC(1)



NAME
       txlc − TXL Programming Language Compiler (Version 10.6)

SYNOPSIS
       txlc [ txloptions ] txlfile

DESCRIPTION
       The  ‘txlc’ command provides a convenient interface for compiling a TXL
       program to a standalone executable which can be  distributed  and  exe‐
       cuted  independently of TXL.  The single command argument ‘program.Txl’
       is the TXL program to be compiled.  The TXL program file must be  named
       ending in the suffix ‘.Txl’andmustbeeitherinthecurrentworkingdirectory,
       in the ./Txl subdirectory of the current directory, or  in  the  system
       TXL library (e.g., /usr/local/lib/txl or C:/windows/txl ).

       txlc  uses  the  TXL  compiler/interpreter (see txl(1) ) to compile the
       program to a TXL virtual machine byte code file, and then runs the  TXL
       byte  code converter to produce a C program that is compiled and linked
       with the TXL virtual machine to produce the output file  filename.x  or
       filename.exe,  a standalone executable program.  txlc requires that the
       command line C compiler and linker (normally cc(1) or  gcc(1)  on  Unix
       and  Linux  systems, xlc(1) on AIX, and the MSVisualC++6.0 command line
       tools on Windows) are installed and available in  the  current  command
       line environment.

       All TXL information and error messages from the compile are sent to the
       terminal via the standard error stream ( /dev/stderr or CONERR$ ).

OPTIONS
       Command line options of the txlc command are  identical  to  those  for
       txl(1).

FILES
       filename.Txl             input TXL program to be compiled (txlfile)
       filename.CTxl            intermediate TXL virtual machine byte code
       filename_TXL.c           intermediate C code
       filename.x               output executable program
       /usr/local/lib/txl       system TXL program library

BUGS
       Bugs  should  be  reported  using  the support page on the TXL website,
       http://www.txl.ca .

SEE ALSO
       txl(1), ‘‘The TXL Programming Language, version 10.6’’, ‘‘User’s  Guide
       to the TXL Compiler/Interpreter, version 10.6’’.

AUTHORS
       Version  10.6  of  TXL  was  designed  and implemented by J.R. Cordy at
       Queen’s University,  Legasys  Corp.  and  TXL  Software  Research  Inc.
       between 1994 and 2012.

       TXL  was originally designed by J.R. Cordy and C.D. Halpern‐Hamu at the
       University of Toronto in 1985, and was originally implemented  by  J.R.
       Cordy, E.M. Promislow and I.H. Carmichael at Queen’s University between
       1986 and 1988.  Version 7 was completely redesigned and implemented  by
       J.R.  Cordy and A. Malton at Queen’s University in 1992, and Version 10
       was redesigned from the ground up by J.R. Cordy in 2001.

COPYRIGHT
       Copyright 2012 Queen’s University at Kingston and James R. Cordy.



                                  5 July 2012                          TXLC(1)
