TXLP(1)                                                                TXLP(1)



NAME
       txlp − TXL Programming Language Profiler (Version 10.6)

SYNOPSIS
       txlp [ profoptions ] [ txloptions ] inputfile [ txlfile ] [ ‐ userop‐
       tions ]
       txlp profoptions

DESCRIPTION
       The ‘txlp’ command provides a convenient interface  for  profiling  the
       grammar  and  transformation  rules of a TXL program for a given input.
       The command line format is identical to the txl command  ‐  see  txl(1)
       for  details.   ‘txlp’ compiles, loads and executes the the TXL program
       using a special profiling version of the TXL interpreter,  and  outputs
       the  result  profile  to the terminal on the standard error stream.  By
       default, a profile of the rule set is output, sorted by cumulative time
       spent  executing  each rule and its subrules.  Using the ‐parse command
       line option, a profile of the grammar in parsing the  input  is  output
       instead.   Options  allow sorting of the profile output by time, space,
       number of search cycles, or parse efficiency.

       When run with profiling options only  (e.g.,  txlp‐space  ),  txlp  re‐
       interprets the results of the previous txlp run as indicated by the new
       profiling options.  This is done by re‐reading  the  raw  profile  data
       stored in the files ‘txl.pprofout’ and ‘txl.rprofout’ which are created
       by txlp when it is first run.

OPTIONS
       The following profiling options are recognized  by  the  txlp  command.
       Other command line options are as described for the txl(1) command.

       −parse    Output a grammar parsing profile rather than the default rule
                 transformation profile.

       −time     Sort the profile by the most cumulative time per rule or non‐
                 terminal (default).

       −space    Sort  the  profile by the most cumulative space used per rule
                 or nonterminal.

       −calls    Sort the profile by the most invocations per rule or  nonter‐
                 minal.

       −cycles   Sort  the profile by the most search/match cycles per rule or
                 most parse cycles per nonterminal.

       −eff      Sort the profile by the least parse efficiency per  nontermi‐
                 nal.  Must be used with ‐parse.

       −percall  Show  average  time,  space and cycles per rule invocation or
                 nonterminal call.

FILES
       inputfile           the input to be transformed
       txlfile                  the TXL program to transform it
       txl.pprofout             parser profile raw data file
       txl.rprofout             transformer profile raw data file
       /usr/local/lib/txl       system TXL program library
       /usr/local/lib/txl/txlpf.x    TXL profile generator
       /usr/local/lib/txl/txlapr.x   TXL profile analyzer

BUGS
       Bugs should be reported using the support  page  on  the  TXL  website,
       http://www.txl.ca .

SEE ALSO
       txl(1),  ‘‘The TXL Programming Language, version 10.6’’, ‘‘User’s Guide
       to the TXL Compiler/Interpreter, version 10.6’’.

AUTHORS
       Version 10.6 of TXL was designed  and  implemented  by  J.R.  Cordy  at
       Queen’s  University,  Legasys  Corp.  and  TXL  Software  Research Inc.
       between 1994 and 2012.

       TXL was originally designed by J.R. Cordy and C.D. Halpern‐Hamu at  the
       University  of  Toronto in 1985, and was originally implemented by J.R.
       Cordy, E.M. Promislow and I.H. Carmichael at Queen’s University between
       1986  and 1988.  Version 7 was completely redesigned and implemented by
       J.R. Cordy and A. Malton at Queen’s University in 1992, and Version  10
       was redesigned from the ground up by J.R. Cordy in 2001.

COPYRIGHT
       Copyright 2012 Queen’s University at Kingston and James R. Cordy.



                                  5 July 2012                          TXLP(1)
